"<p>The urban fringe morphology project has the following three elements:</p>

<p>1. Calculate land consumption rates and land absorption coefficients by Valley community. Jeff James, a graduate research assistant, is conducting an analysis of population and employment densities using Maricopa Association of Government data. He will produce 1990-1995 land consumption rates and land absorption coefficients for the 25 local municipalities in the Valley. We also are exploring the feasibility of including 1980 Census data in this analysis. Kim Knowles-Yanez, the CAP LTER post-doc, will conduct a qualitative inventory of community planning and development policies for the 25 municipalities. Our goal is to determine whether differing community land use policies resulted in varying intensities of land development at the fringe. In other words, were communities with stricter development controls more successful in stimulating higher density development than communities with weaker controls</p>

<p>2. Identify the indirect visible urban fringe. Beyond the built-up area is a zone that is on the brink of urban development. It is affected by urbanization, but does not yet meet the threshold density for inclusion in the urbanized area. We seek to monitor the changes in this landscape as urbanization unfolds through two methods. First, we are investigating how feasible it is to study this area through land cover changes, watching the turnover from agriculture and open space to built-up area. We also plan to monitor more localized landscape change through fieldwork. The literature suggests a number of landscape features that mark incipient urbanization, including the presence of dog kennels and boarding stables, horse trails, cell-phone towers, and real estate signs. The product of this exercise will be a narrative of pre-urban fringe activity. What activities are precursors of fringe development in Phoenix?</p>

<p>3. Identify the indirect invisible urban fringe. Also in areas at the cusp of development, we want to monitor land use change that is invisible to the naked eye. Soon-to-be-developed areas are characterized by a flurry of real estate transactions and by a shift in ownership from private individuals to corporations. We have been working with Dr. Tim Hogan to use Center for Business Research files of metropolitan real estate transactions categorized by location and types of owner. Predictably, these data are not organized for our purposes and will require considerable effort to make them usable to us. Our goal here is to examine land tenure change as the fringe unfolds. We plan to conduct this analysis for the same four areas where we will do field work to identify the visible markers of urban development.</p>

"
